---
layout: post
title:  "TCP MD5"
date:   2019-11-23 00:00:00 +0000
categories: network, security, linux, openbsd, programming
---

[TCP_MD5 (RFC 2385)][RFC] is something that doesn't come up
often. There's a couple of reasons for that, good and bad.

I used it with [tlssh][tlssh], but back then (2010) it was not
practical due to the limitations in the API on Linux and OpenBSD.

This is an updated post, written after I discovered `TCP_MD5SIG_EXT`.

## What it is

In short it's a TCP option that adds an MD5-based signature to every
TCP packet. It signs the source and destination IP addresses, ports,
and the payload. That way the data is both authenticated and integrity
protected.

When an endpoint enables TCP MD5, all unsigned packets (including SYN
packets) are silently dropped. For a signed connection it's not even
possible for an eavesdropper to reset the connection, since the RST
would need to be signed.

Because it's on a TCP level instead of part of the protocol on top of
TCP, it's the only thing that can protect a TCP connection against
[RST attacks][rst-attack].

It's used by the [BGP][BGP] protocol to set a password on the
connection, instead of sending the password in the handshake. If the
password doesn't match the TCP connection doesn't even establish.

But outside of BGP it's essentially not used, which is a shame. If we
could enable it for any TCP service it'd add a preshared key and if
nothing else completely replace the silly [port
knocking][portknocking]. It probably couldn't replace user passwords,
but it could add a layer and greatly reduce attack surface much more
than, say, a TLS certificate.

It's MD5. Sure, MD5 still doesn't have any [preimage
attack][Preimage]. Well, [none that's feasible anyway][MD5Preimage].

So that should be fine. And if not then there's already [TCP
AO][TCPAO] which is about the same but with other algorithms.

## How to use it

### For the server (on Linux)

```c
const char* password = "hello";
struct tcp_md5sig sig;
memset(&sig, 0, sizeof(sig));
memcpy(&sig.tcpm_addr, &peer_sockaddr, peer_sockaddr_len);
sig.tcpm_flags = TCP_MD5SIG_FLAG_PREFIX;
sig.tcpm_prefixlen = 0;                  // Match any address.
sig.tcpm_keylen = std::min(TCP_MD5SIG_MAXKEYLEN, strlen(password));
memcpy(sig.tcpm_key, password, sig.tcpm_keylen);
if (setsockopt(s, IPPROTO_TCP, TCP_MD5SIG_EXT, &sig, sizeof(sig)) == -1) {
  fprintf(stderr, "Failed to setsockopt(): %s\n", strerror(errno));
  exit(1);
}
```

### For the client (on Linux)

```c
const char* password = "hello";
struct tcp_md5sig sig;
memset(&sig, 0, sizeof(sig));
memcpy(&sig.tcpm_addr, &peer_sockaddr, peer_sockaddr_len);
sig.tcpm_keylen = std::min(TCP_MD5SIG_MAXKEYLEN, strlen(password));
memcpy(sig.tcpm_key, password, sig.tcpm_keylen);
if (setsockopt(s, IPPROTO_TCP, TCP_MD5SIG_EXT, &sig, sizeof(sig)) == -1) {
  fprintf(stderr, "Failed to setsockopt(): %s\n", strerror(errno));
  exit(1);
}
```

On the client you can use `TCP_MD5SIG` instead of `TCP_MD5SIG_EXT`,
since it won't need to set the prefixlen.

## The sad reason it's not used: It doesn't work through NAT

Because it signs the source and destination address and port. This is
getting to be less and less of an issue as the world goes IPv6. So
maybe we can see more of this in the future.

This was never really a problem for BGP, since production BGP doesn't
run through NAT.

## It *used to* be impossible to use on Linux for most applications

The `TCP_MD5SIG` socket option on Linux requires specifying *exactly*
what the remote address is. This doesn't make sense for listening
sockets, like an OpenSSH server, which won't know ahead of time what
the remote address is.

BGP doesn't really have clients and servers, just mutually configured
peers, so it works fine there.

It used to be possible (back in 2010) to enable MD5 *after* a
connection is established. And indeed this is what I did with `tlssh`
back in 2010. But trying that now it results in `EINVAL`. Which is
odd, because TCP MD5 was made for routers, and routers most certainly
allows enabling TCP MD5 on an existing connection.

Back when you could enable it for an existing connection you could
actually make this practical without `TCP_MD5SIG_EXT`, and it's what I
did with [tlssh][tlssh]: You enable TCP MD5 immediately after the
connection is established. If the two ends don't have the same
password set, then no packets will go through in either direction, and
the connections will just time out. Not the best experience, but it
worked. Nowadays with `TCP_MD5SIG_EXT` it works perfectly and as
expected.

The latest code for `tlssh` uses the newer better way.

## On OpenBSD it's a system-level setting

On OpenBSD you set up the TCP MD5 as a security association between
the two hosts, and then the program just enables MD5 on the
socket. And it "just works" on both the client and the server. Well, a
bit annoying that the key is set in hex.

```shell
# cat > /etc/tcpmd5.conf
tcpmd5 from 2001:db8::1111 to 2001:db8::2222 spi 0x100 authkey 0x68656c6c6f
tcpmd5 from 2001:db8::2222 to 2001:db8::1111 spi 0x101 authkey 0x68656c6c6f
^D
# ipsecctl -f /etc/tcpmd5.conf
```

```c
const int on = 1;
if (setsockopt(s, IPPROTO_TCP, TCP_MD5SIG, &on, sizeof(on)) == -1) {
  fprintf(stderr, "Failed to setsockopt(): %s\n", strerror(errno));
  exit(1);
}
```

Netcat with the `-S` option does the latter, but the password still
needs to be set in the config.

So on OpenBSD it doesn't really mesh well with adding TCP MD5 to any
and all programs. Even if you set up the Security Association inside
your program instead of in your config it seems more a state of the
*system* than a state of *your connection*. Which makes some sense
with BGP, but almost nothing else.

I've not fully explored how feasible it is to add the SA from the
program itself yet, due to lack of time. I'll get back to it.

## Patches

I've [patched OpenSSH][patched-openssh] to enable TCP MD5. Works
great. Right now it just uses a static password, but that still
protects you against internet-wide spread port scans that don't know
what you're running on port 2222.

```
$ sudo tcpdump -M openssh -nlpi lo port 2222
[…]
16:04:12.212566 IP6 ::1.2222 > ::1.43934: Flags [P.], seq 1828532:1828704, ack 1117, win 179, options [nop,nop,md5 valid], length 172
[…]
```
(note the `md5 valid`)

This sure is better than [portknocking][portknocking]. The only
problem is that it doesn't work through IPv4 NAT. So just use IPv6.

## The future

It would be awesome if everyone added TCP MD5 support for
everything. Imagine how hard it would be to portscan if every port has
a password. Even if it's a simple password, or an organization-wide
password, that still makes it harder for hackers to create databases
of *all* listening ports over the whole internet, and what's behind
them.

Instead of "is this port open? Yes? Then let's check banners and see
what that is" it'll be "Is there an SSH running on this port? No? Then
maybe a mysql? No? Then maybe...". The problem becomes NP instead of
P.

## Links

* `TCP_MD5SIG_EXT` implementation [patch1][extpatch1] &
  [patch2][extpatch2], first appeared in Linux kernel 4.13.
* Apparently I'm getting old. I forgot I've already have [conversation
  about this with the OpenSSH people][openssh-thread].

[openssh-thread]: https://lists.mindrot.org/pipermail/openssh-unix-dev/2016-January/034677.html
[extpatch1]: https://www.spinics.net/lists/netdev/msg438858.html
[extpatch2]: https://www.spinics.net/lists/netdev/msg438857.html
[RFC]: https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc2385
[Preimage]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Preimage_attack
[MD5Preimage]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/MD5#Preimage_vulnerability
[tlssh]: 2010-08-05-tlssh---a-replacement-for-SSH.html
[TCPAO]: https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc5925
[BGP]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Border_Gateway_Protocol
[portknocking]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Port_knocking
[rst-attack]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/TCP_reset_attack
[patched-openssh]: https://github.com/ThomasHabets/openssh-portable
